# A brief look into partisanship and cabinet approvals.

Since Trump took office in January, I have been closely following many of the cabinet appoinment and approval processes going on in the Senate. Most notably, I've noticed that there has been significant pushback among Senate Democrats against several of Trump's nominees, particularly Scott Pruitt, Betsy DeVos, Rex Tillerson, and Jeff Sessions. This got me wondering - has partisanship increased over time (which I assume it has), and if so, can that be seen through cabinet approvals?

Through data.world, I found a data set of Congressional voting results from 1981-2017 for president-appointed positions throughout the government. I filtered out positions to only be related to the 15 cabinet positions and other big-title positions - this includes positions such as "Secretary of State" as well as "Deputy Secretary of State," in addition to Director of CIA and Representative to the United Nations.

What I have found is that the spread of votes approving nominees for these positions has increased over time. Below, I have attempted to find some additional meaning in these results by looking at the Republican-Democrat balance in power in the Senate and Executive Office. In general, it appears that transitions of power in the Executive Branch bring about a wider spread of approval from the Senate, likely due to some idealogical pushback from members of the opposing party. For example, the Reagan-to-H.W. Bush transition of power brought about a very low standard deviation and high average votes of approval, while H.W. Bush to Clinton saw the opposite effect. However, from 2009 onwards, years with more than a couple position appointments have seen a steadly increasing spread of votes of approval.

Ultimately, more information is needed here to be more confident in the reasons behind the voting pattern we're seeing. While increased partisanship may be a factor, it very likely is not the only one. This sort of analysis can be susceptible to distortion, either due to numbers of votes in different administrations, circumstances or eras, or maybe due to treating a discrete variable (Executive power or Exec/Senate combo) as continuous. Which suggests another variable or possible filter: looking only at new administrations or only at post-election replacements (whether new or second term). This quickly turns into a study of what to isolate for analysis, which is part of what makes it interesting.

Thoughts? Comments? Questions? Concerns? Feel free to reach out and discuss!
